.\" man page for msplat — Metal-native 3D Gaussian Splatting trainer
.TH MSPLAT 1 "2026-06-10" "msplat 1.2" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
msplat \- train a 3D Gaussian Splatting scene on Apple Silicon (Metal)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B msplat
.I input
.RI [ options ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B msplat
trains a 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) scene from a photogrammetry capture and
writes a standard 3DGS binary PLY. The entire pipeline \(em projection,
tile binning, sorting, rasterization, SSIM/L1 loss, backward pass, Adam, and
densification \(em runs as fused Metal compute kernels. There is no CUDA and no
PyTorch dependency; the only requirements are macOS 14+ and an Apple Silicon GPU.
.PP
.I input
is the project root of a dataset (the directory that \fIcontains\fR
.B sparse/
and
.BR images/ ,
not
.BR sparse/0/ ).
The dataset format is auto-detected.
.SH INPUT FORMATS
.TP
.B COLMAP
.I input\fR/sparse/0/\fR{cameras,images,points3D}.bin (or .txt) and
.IR input \fR/images/.
A flat layout with the model files at the root is also accepted. Use
.B \-\-colmap\-image\-path
to point at images stored elsewhere. Pinhole, simple\-radial, radial and OpenCV
camera models are supported; Brown\-Conrady distortion is undistorted on load.
.TP
.B Nerfstudio
.IR input \fR/transforms.json (+ images; optional \fBply_file_path\fR point cloud).
.TP
.B Polycam
.IR input \fR/keyframes/corrected_cameras/ + corrected_images/, or a single
.IR input \fR/cameras.json.
.SH OUTPUT
A binary\-little\-endian PLY at
.B \-o
with the canonical 3DGS property set:
.B x y z nx ny nz f_dc_0..2 f_rest_0..44 opacity scale_0..2 rot_0..3.
Scales are stored in log space and opacity pre\-sigmoid; quaternions are
[w x y z]. A
.B cameras.json
is written alongside the output. The
.B .splat
extension selects the compact splat format instead of PLY. Use
.B \-\-save\-every
to also write periodic checkpoints named
.IR stem _ STEP .ext.
.SH OPTIONS
.SS General
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Print help and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print version (with git revision) and exit.
.TP
.BI \-o,\ \-\-output \ PATH
Output scene path (default
.BR splat.ply ).
.TP
.BI \-s,\ \-\-save\-every \ N
Write a checkpoint every N steps (default \-1, disabled).
.TP
.BI \-\-resume \ PLY
Resume training from a PLY, continuing the iteration/LR/densification schedule.
.TP
.B \-\-keep\-crs
Retain the input coordinate reference system in the output.
.TP
.BI \-\-colmap\-image\-path \ DIR
Override the COLMAP image directory.
.SS Training
.TP
.BI \-n,\ \-\-num\-iters \ N
Training iterations, 1\(en1000000 (default 30000).
.TP
.BI \-d,\ \-\-downscale\-factor \ F
Image downscale factor, 1.0\(en32.0 (default 1.0).
.TP
.BI \-\-num\-downscales \ K
Progressive\-resolution levels (default 2).
.TP
.BI \-\-resolution\-schedule \ N
Steps between resolution bumps (default 3000).
.TP
.BI \-\-sh\-degree \ D
Maximum spherical\-harmonics degree, 0\(en4 (default 3).
.TP
.BI \-\-sh\-degree\-interval \ N
Steps between SH\-degree increases (default 1000).
.TP
.BI \-\-ssim\-weight \ W
SSIM vs L1 blend, 0.0\(en1.0 (default 0.2; 0 = pure L1).
.TP
.BI \-\-preset \ NAME
Apply a quality preset before other flags:
.B draft
(\-n 7000 \-d 2 \-\-sh\-degree 2 \-\-max\-splats 1000000),
.B balanced
(\-n 30000 \-\-max\-splats 3000000),
.B production
(\-n 100000 \-\-max\-splats 6000000).
Any flag you set explicitly overrides the preset.
.SS Densification
.TP
.BI \-\-refine\-every \ N
Densify/prune cadence (default 100).
.TP
.BI \-\-warmup\-length \ N
Steps before densification starts (default 500).
.TP
.BI \-\-reset\-alpha\-every \ N
Opacity\-reset cadence in refines (default 30).
.TP
.BI \-\-densify\-grad\-thresh \ T
Positional\-gradient split threshold (default 0.0002).
.TP
.BI \-\-densify\-size\-thresh \ T
Size threshold for split vs clone (default 0.01).
.TP
.BI \-\-stop\-screen\-size\-at \ N
Stop screen\-size splits after N steps (default 4000).
.TP
.BI \-\-split\-screen\-size \ S
Screen\-space split threshold (default 0.05).
.SS Resources
.TP
.BI \-\-max\-splats \ N
Hard cap on gaussian count (0 = unlimited). At or above the cap the densify pass
prunes only (growth is disabled), bounding peak unified memory on shared machines.
.TP
.BI \-\-memory\-budget \ GB
Advisory unified\-memory budget; derives
.B \-\-max\-splats
when that is not set explicitly (heuristic ~900 B/splat, 55% usable).
.SS Output / background
.TP
.BI \-\-bg\-color \ "R G B"
Training background, each 0\(en1 (default black). Black matches typical viewers
and pipelines.
.TP
.B \-\-debug\-bg
Use a magenta debug background that highlights under\-reconstructed regions.
Ignored if
.B \-\-bg\-color
is given.
.SS Progress / verbosity
.TP
.BI \-\-progress\-every \ N
Emit a progress line every N steps, 0 = off (default 100). Lines are flushed per
write and are not gated on a TTY, so they stream when piped.
.TP
.BI \-\-progress\-format \ FMT
.B plain
(default):
.RB \[dq] step=i/n\ splats=C\ loss=L\ ms/it=T \[dq];
.B jsonl
:
.RB \[dq] {\[dq]step\[dq]:i,...} \[dq].
.TP
.B \-\-quiet
Suppress progress and per\-event logs (errors still shown).
.TP
.B \-\-verbose
Verbose logging.
.SS Evaluation / validation
.TP
.B \-\-eval
Evaluate on held\-out test views; prints per\-view and mean PSNR/SSIM/L1.
.TP
.BI \-\-test\-every \ N
Hold out every Nth view, 2\(en100 (default 8).
.TP
.B \-\-val
Withhold one camera for validation.
.TP
.BI \-\-val\-image \ NAME
Validation image filename (default random).
.TP
.BI \-\-val\-render \ DIR
Render the validation view to DIR every 10 steps.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 3
Dataset load failure (unrecognized format, missing files).
.TP
.B 4
GPU/Metal initialization failure (reserved).
.TP
.B 5
Output write failure.
.TP
.B 130 / 143
Interrupted by SIGINT / SIGTERM. The in\-flight iteration completes, a partial
scene is written to
.IR stem _interrupted.ext ,
and the process exits.
.TP
.B >=100
Argument/validation error (CLI11 conventions).
.SH SIGNALS
.B SIGINT
and
.B SIGTERM
trigger a clean shutdown with a partial save (see EXIT STATUS).
.B SIGSTOP / SIGCONT
pause and resume the process (handled by the OS).
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B BENCHMARK
If set, print per\-iteration timing statistics after training.
.TP
.B PROFILE_GPU
If set (with BENCHMARK), add GPU command\-buffer timing.
.TP
.B PROFILE_STAGES
If set (with BENCHMARK), add per\-kernel\-stage GPU timing.
.SH EXAMPLES
Train at full resolution with held\-out evaluation:
.PP
.RS
.B msplat ./scene \-n 7000 \-\-eval
.RE
.PP
Pipeline use (black background, streaming JSONL progress, bounded memory):
.PP
.RS
.B msplat ./scene \-\-preset balanced \-\-bg\-color 0 0 0 \-\-progress\-format jsonl \-\-max\-splats 3000000 \-o /out/scene.ply
.RE
.PP
Profile per\-kernel GPU time:
.PP
.RS
.B BENCHMARK=1 PROFILE_STAGES=1 msplat ./scene \-n 1500 \-d 2
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
Project documentation under
.BR docs/ ,
the integration contract in
.BR gsplata_integration.md .
.SH LICENSE
Apache\-2.0.
